Welcome back.
It's time to sort some arrays.
Let's grab this function.
Put it at the very end because hopefully it will work at the very end and.
Start writing our code.
We'll start off by first defining the function called merge sorted arrays.
It's going to take the first parameter, which is the first array, then the second parameter which
is the second array.
I'm going to first define some variables that we're going to use throughout the function.
The first one will be a constant, which is merged array.
Which will be our answer for now.
It's going to be an empty array.
And we might as well just make sure that we return this merged array at the end.
Hopefully it all works and we can populate this with these two arrays.
Now in here.
I want to grab the.
Array one item.
Just for reference, and this is going to be our very first array item.
So this simply has the zero item here and our first array.
And then we'll do the same thing.
Array two item.
Which is going to grab the number four from here.
Now the very first thing I like doing in a function is checking for some sort of an input, making sure
that everything.
Works.
I'm going to spare you the time of me doing this because you should have an idea of how to check whether
it's an array, whether you have two parameters.
But the one input that I think is worth checking is what if we have something like this?
Where the second array is just an empty array.
In our case, we can just return the first array because, well, it's already sorted.
We're still merging the two arrays, but the other array doesn't have anything.
And that's the same if this first array was just empty as well.
So to avoid any extra work, let's check for those conditions so that right away we can give out the
answer and make our function more efficient in those cases.
So I can just do an if statement, I'll say array one length.
If that is equals to zero.
So if first array is empty, just simply return the secondary.
And we can do the same for the other case.
If array to length is empty, then we can just return the first array.
Nice and simple.
But now let's get into the harder topic, which is what happens if both of these arrays are full like
they are now?
Well, just to change things up, because I've been using the for loops for a while.
I'll use the while loop in JavaScript and this simply says loop through the items while a condition
is met.
In our case, I'm going to say while there is an array, one item.
Or there is an array to item.
Do something.
And remember, these variables are simply for now.
The first item in each one of the arrays.
And by the way, if you're wondering why sometimes I use cost, sometimes I use lit.
Well, cost means that once I assign this variable to this array, I can't modify it.
I can't say merged array equals to two.
It's going to give me a warning because it's a constant.
I can add things to the array, but I can change this reference to the array.
On the other hand, let allows me to do that.
So later on I can say array one item equals to something new like array one and the index of one.
So that is why we're using this syntax.
It's a new ES6 syntax in JavaScript.
All right.
So while we have things in the arrays.
We want to first.
Do a bit of a check.
Let's say if.
One item is less than.
To item that is if zero is less than four.
We want to.
Add to the merged array, empty array.
We want to say push and we'll push the first item in the array.
So we're going to push zero.
And because we've now pushed the zero item.
Into this array.
We don't really need to worry about zero anymore, so we can just simply say array one.
Item is now going to equal array one at.
Index of.
One.
Right.
Because now we want to move to array item that's over here at index of one, which is three so that
we can compare three with four.
Now we want to increment this every time.
And because we're doing a loop here, let's convert this into an index that is ie and increment it ie
plus plus.
And at the top over here, we can just say for the beginning that I.
Is going to equal one.
So that way as we loop through this, this is going to increment with A-plus plus.
So that is increment by one so that we can go 034 31.
And by the way, I just noticed that I can't spell.
This should be a ray over here.
All right.
Now that's the case when a ray one item is less than array two.
But let's do the other side.
If array two, item is less than array one.
We now?
Merge into the array.
Hurray to item.
Because if a ray one item is not less than a ray two item, we don't even need to add a condition here.
We know that a ray one item is greater than a ray.
Two items, in which case we can just.
Add the second item.
So that is we add this item instead.
And again, we want to do the exact same thing that we did with the first item or the first array.
That is the array two item is now going to equal a way to.
And we need a different index of this.
We can't use the same one rate.
So we can just say this is going to be J.
And up here we simply do the same thing.
Jay is going to equal to one.
So once we figured out the zero index items, we can then move on to index of one, then index of two,
index of three, so on and so forth.
Now let's check this code and see if it works.
If I run this.
Oh, you'll see that my browser just crashed.
And that's because I have a setting on Ripple which allows for well, for this to happen.
Most likely if you're using the default settings here, it will give you a warning.
But let's go back.
Why did that happen?
This is why it's always a good idea to go step by step and make sure things work.
We did a lot of coding here without actually testing if any of this works.
So a good note here is to pause every once in a while and just test your assumptions.
Log out the answers.
In this case, we missed a critical point that is in this check over here.
We do the while loop as long as array, one item or array two items are populated and we check here
if array one item is less than array two item.
But the problem here is that we could have a case where one of these because we're using or could be
undefined or we reach the end of the line in order to account for that.
The critical thing to do here is to always know how your code is running.
So let's do a console.log here.
Say array one item.
And then array two item.
Let's see what we get throughout the loop.
If I run this, it's going to crash again and we won't be able to see our logs.
So I'm just going to.
Write down the correct phrasing here and then explain why we did what we did.
I'm going to just say if.
Array.
Two item.
If the array two item doesn't exist.
So if we have undefined.
It's going to turn this into true.
So we run through this.
Hmm.
What is that?
Let's have a look.
Notice what we just logged here.
We've logged array one item, then array two item.
So this is where we're comparing throughout our loops.
Zero and four, then three and four, then form four, then four and six, then 31 and six, 31 and
30 and then 31 and on undefined.
You see here how the second array item becomes undefined.
And in order for us to.
Bypass this undefined which becomes on define here.
And we use the exclamation mark in JavaScript to turn this into a true statement.
So it turns into this so that we can add the 31 in array, one into the final slot of the array.
Now, if this was like this and I run.
We get undefined for the.
First array.
However, because we're doing this second check, which is is a ray one item less than a ray two item.
And in our case, if we do undefined.
Less than six, which is what we're doing here in this comparison.
If I run this.
And let's console.log this.
See what the answer is.
I get false.
So even though in this time around array one is undefined because we've gone through it because this
statement is false, we go to the loss statement.
And fill their rest of the array with six and 13 or 30 which come form array to.
Now.
I wanted to point this out to you, because this may not be the cleanest solution.
Right?
I mean, looking at this code, just think about what I had to explain and draw out for you to fully
understand how this works.
And I did this for a specific reason.
During the interview, if you have to explain things in detail like this and write things out, well,
perhaps there's a better way of writing it.
Because an interviewer is going to get confused as to what this means then what this means.
And it doesn't really read like English, does it?
Ideally, these functions are really, really nice to just read.
So perhaps I can take this part of the function and convert it into its own function and just name this
as should push first array item and this should be should push array to item and by extracting out these
pieces of code into their own little function.
You can clean out this answer and make it more readable.
And interviewers are going to like that.
Now, during an interview, you may not have time to do so, but you can let the interviewer know how
you wrote the solution.
And you understand that this is probably not the most readable solution and this is what you would do
to clean it up.
You don't have to actually code it as long as you tell them and you understand where you would improve
things.
That in an interviewer XYZ is just as good as you actually coding it that way.
All right.
Looks like this is working.
If I do an empty array here, I see that it's still working.
Our answer is.
Looking good.
Hope you got this far.
I'll see you in the next video.
Bye bye.